+++
date = "2010-01-07T22:14:08+01:00"
draft = false
title = "The philosophy of singing"

+++

<p>I have spent most of the time since 1995, singing. It is widely accepted that going to University is simply an opportunity for doing things that you really want to do and not have your parents, guardians, or house hold pets looking down their noses at you. For the majority of the student population this usually taken to be over indulgency in alcohol, sex, swearing, Methodism, bear-baiting or local government. For me it meant singing. This might at first glance seem rather boring and uninviting when you compare it to the candid delights that await the novice clubber, but bear with me.<!--more--><br /><h3><em>What singing is and why it is important to do it properly.</em></h3><br />It is often thought by those uninformed wretches who exist in the major of this once great nation that anything should be sung and anyone can sing it. This is a false conclusion, and I hate it as an unfilled can. There is a great wealth of material to sing but be warey, it is a common place activity to dress an uninteresting score in an attractive cover to entice you to buy. <em>Resist!</em> You must first leave that low grade music vendor and seek out a choir, for fullment in singing is all about harmony. What is the point in singing if there is no rich texture of counter melody (There are notable exceptions to this rule of thumb, but this will be discussed later)? Never be tempted to sing in unison if there is harmony available, it is a crime and you will be punished for it when the Bourgoisie are back in power. You must not be tempted to just join any choir, for it is well known that technical expertise and denomenational snobbery can only be accurately achieved by Anglicans. You must find an Anglican church choir. Do it and do it now, while you have the muse. The reason that Anglican churches are well respected for their music in Britain, is that they provide something unique which has been exported all over the world. The Anglican church has many services which are sung. One could travel to any part of the country and find a small parish church where the centuries old tradiation of evensong is being carried out. I must advise caution: many churches are filled with old people, who once may have had fine voices but now the majority will be crooning their way through Darke in F every week, only 1/3 of them can actually reach an F. Their efforts are to be commended but we as the old people of the future have a duty to put them out to pasture. Younger people need to sing more, your life may very well depend on it.<br /><h3><em>Ideology</em></h3><br />Why should we sing? My dear fellows, why should you not. Imagine if everyone were taught to sing Byrd, Purcell and S.S.Wesley. Suddenly street crime would disappear, what need would youths have to mug grannies when they used all of their energy to tease tudor suspensions or cheekily inject an english cadence. To challenge the mind with Howells and Leighton would increase the intellectual standing of our nation, so that the Continent would no longer "laugh us to scorn". Rehabilitation centres would see a deluge from them as addicts voluntarily threw down their vices, looking at them with flared nostrils and pursed lips, and break into "O where shall wisdom be found". No matter what your persuasion is, I garuntee that you will adore singing music that does not patronise you, but fills your soul with fire.</p>